Once around, dark stars.
So, dark stars are large clouds of
hydrogen and helium gas, millions of
solar masses of material, and hot and
very bright, emitting huge amounts of
energy from them, powered by cores made
of dark matter. And it's possible that
these things were formed very early on
in the uh early stages, the first 200
million years after the Big Bang.
Well, if we're going to talk about stars
powered by dark matter, I guess we
should talk a little bit about dark
matter first. And the picture on the
right here is the Coma Cluster. This is
a cluster of galaxies and most of the
objects that you see there, the blue uh
fuzzy objects, those are all galaxies
within the cluster. There's one or two
bright stars there as well with the
defraction spikes on, but most of the
objects are galaxies. One or two quite
massive ones in the middle and lots and
lots of smaller ones.
321 million light years away. So, a fair
distance, not really in our cosmic
backyard. And we can see there the two
large elliptical galaxies, 10 bright
spirals and many, many smaller ones. And
this was the subject of a study back in
1933 by this guy Fritz Vicki. What he
did was to estimate the masses of the
galaxies based on the brightness and to
use the Doppler shift of the spectra to
work out the speed with which the
galaxies were moving towards or away
from us. You can't track the lateral
movement. They're too far away to show
any. But we can use the spectra to get
the radial component.
So, having done both of those, you can
compare the speed they're moving against
the amount of mass that you think is
trying to trap these things into orbit
around the common center of mass. And he
did that and discovered that they were
moving so fast that they should fly
apart and this cluster should not retain
its integrity. Um, and so either we were
extraordinarily lucky to see it in this
state or it wasn't stable and wouldn't
be around for long. Um, or there was
something strange going on because it
wasn't just a little bit wrong. It was a
factor of 450 times too lightweight in
terms of the total mass of the cluster
to be able to hang on to the galaxies
moving at that speed. That's not a small
error at all. A factor of 450.
So to weigh the galaxies, to work out
the mass, it's a fairly straightforward
process. You look at the total
brightness of the galaxy. You take the
average brightness of your typical star
and you multiply by your estimate of the
number of stars in the galaxy and these
should add up. You should get the total
brightness being the average brightness
times the number of stars. You have to
add in the glowing gas. You have to add
in the mass of the nebula matter um and
any dust and uh other material that you
can see in the dust lanes. And you have
to make adjustments for any dark dust
clouds that might be blocking your line
of sight and fooling you as to what the
true brightness and distance might be.
But if you add all of the these factors
together, you can come up with a pretty
reasonable estimate for the mass of the
galaxies. And that's what Fritz Vicki
did. And then he balanced the kinetic
energy of motion, half the mass times
the square of the velocity
versus the potential energy.
Looking at roughly where the center of
mass of the cluster is, you can
determine where the galaxies are and how
far away they are from that and
calculate the moment that they would
have the mass times the distance as if
you were balancing it all up on a
balance beam here. And it should be such
that uh you're getting figures that uh
bring the system into a stable balance.
This is the so-called viral theorem
which I might do a video on separately
but it will be quite a technical one.
There's some uh complex maths involved
in doing it but you can show that on
average the average kinetic energy of
the system should be equal to half the
potential energy. Um and if that is so
then you have a stable system. If you
have more kinetic energy than that, then
the system is not stable. Maybe we'll
look at that in a new uh edition.
So that was the coma cluster. And then
Fritzviki was really the only person to
think that this called into question the
whole existence of matter in the
universe and suggested that there was
dunul matter, dark matter making up a
huge proportion of the
total mass of the cluster but not
glowing in any form of infrared or
visible light. just not detectable to us
at all. And this was largely ignored for
about 40 years until Vera Rubin shown in
the picture here made an estimate based
not on clusters of galaxies but
individual galaxies looking at the
rotation speed of them. The galaxy that
we have in the image there is face on to
us. You can't really do it with that
one. But if it was edge on to us or at
least partially edge on to us then one
side of the galaxy would be coming
towards and one going away from us. And
as it does so the Doppler effect will
stretch or squeeze the light stretching
it if it's moving away squeezing if it
if it's moving towards us. If it's
squeezed it looks bluer. If it's
stretched it looks redder. And so you
can look at a partially edge on galaxy
and you can see whether the light has
been stretched out to red or squashed to
blue. And that gives you a measure of
the velocity of rotation of the galaxy.
And this is some real data on the right
here for a galaxy called NGC 2403.
And you can see that
on the left it's moving towards us. On
the right it's moving away from us. And
in that middle region, well, it's moving
sideways. And so we don't get any shift
at all. So that's plotted in green
there.
But when you do that, you can compare
what you see by way of the velocity of
the motion of the material in orbit
around the galaxy with Newton's laws of
gravity. And what Newton's laws tell us
is that the orbital speed depends on the
mass interior to the orbit. So if you're
very near the center, anything outside
of your orbit doesn't count. has no
effect. It's only the material nearer to
the center than you are that actually
has an effect on your speed of rotation.
All the other matter uh effectively just
cancels out when you do the maths.
So if you plot the expected speed of
rotation, you get the dotted white curve
which goes up as you move from the
galaxy towards the outside because more
and more material is interior to you
until you end up getting so far away
that uh the amount of more additional
mass that's now inside your orbital path
isn't going up very fast anymore because
you've run out of galaxy but the
distance is now dropping away and once
that happens the ordinary 1 / r 2 law of
gravity should kick in so it should rise
from the core outwards to a peak and
then fall away again but the
observations from re Vera Rubin's
Doppler shift in starlight and from
looking with radio telescopes are
plotted on the solid white line with
starlight in yellow and radio 21 cm
hydrogen emissions further out in the
galaxy in blue and they fit together in
a smooth curve but it's the wrong one.
It looks like things are moving in all
respects faster
than they should be. Although towards
the center the fit is better but the fit
carries on rising. Sorry. The curve
carries on rising and the fit gets worse
once we get past that uh edge of the
visible galaxy. We should expect to see
the speed dropping as gravity
diminishes.
But it's not. It's carrying on rising
which means there is more matter further
out still being included or more mass
still being included in the calculation
causing a higher speed further out. And
this suggests a huge halo of unseen
mass. And indeed, when you do the sums,
you find that the material is off by a
factor of 10. There is 10 times more
mass there than you can account for in
the galaxy overall. So, it's definitely
not adding up in the same way as Fritz
Vickiy's coma cluster analysis wasn't
adding up.
So the question is how can we have got
it so wrong? Is it really that uh this
is happening and that there's a whole
lot of material that we can't see or are
we making a mistake? And people often
ask these questions. So I'm going to try
and deal with a couple of them that
suggest that there is this stuff called
dark matter which is very very weird
indeed.
The first uh objection that is raised is
could the dark matter be dust just
blocking our line of sight? But the
problem with that idea is that the dust
blocking the line of sight would absorb
the light that it's blocking, pick up
energy from it and get warmed up and it
would then begin to glow in the infrared
part of the spectrum. And we're very uh
well equipped with infrared telescopes
these days and we would be able to see
these clouds of warm dust. So sorry it's
not dust. Another suggestion is could it
be black holes?
These are not directly visible. So they
would tick the box for being a dark
thing with a lot of mass.
Uh but they would be very dense lumps of
matter. And as such, if the galaxy was
full of machos, these uh things that are
um massive compact halo objects, it
stands for so objects like black holes
that you can't see that are very dense
and are adding to the total gravity
because of their mass. Well, sometimes
they should pass across the line of
sight of things behind them. And if
there are a lot of them around, we ought
to detect a lot of events where one of
these objects crossed in front of
something that we could see. And when
that happens with uh black holes, uh
they will bend the light around them and
split the image of whatever's behind
them into either a pair of images or
indeed a full-on Einstein ring if the
alignment is perfect. You you get a ring
instead of seeing an individual star.
And we are quite good at detecting these
lensing events, these gravitational
lenses. And there have been many studies
of such things. Um, and the problem is
that when we look towards the huge star
clouds in the center of the galaxy,
there are so many targets that any
wandering black holes or other compact
halo objects would trigger lensing
events so regularly that we would be
able to tell. And we just have not found
any. Just have not been enough of these
micro lensing events. We see a few and
we can explain the ones that we see in
terms of other stars, black holes, and
wandering rogue planets even, but there
just aren't enough of them to add up to
the missing uh enormous percentage of
matter that is needed to make the dark
matter idea work.
There are lots of other lines of
reasoning. One of them is the
power spectrum of the cosmic microwave
background, the CMBB. This is the
radiation left over from the big bang,
which is almost uniform across the sky,
but not quite. It varies by about one
part in a 100,000.
And we have the map of the whole of the
sky on the right there showing those
very tiny variations
in false color. So red is where it's a
little bit too energetic, bit too hot.
Blue is where it's a bit too cold.
But if you study the
distribution of the lumpiness within the
cosmic microwave background radiation
and you look for the
degree of variation
at different size scales,
you get this weird plot on the left hand
side showing how as the scale goes from
a very small to very large, you get this
variation in the amount of structure
that you see of those sizes.
Essentially, these are the rings and
ripples of the early universe ringing
like uh stones thrown into a pond uh
with the ripples moving. And
what we see is not a completely random
distribution but this interesting curve.
The red pink colored curve is the theory
and the dots and bars are the
observations and they fit together
extremely well. But this only works if
we assume that there was a substantial
amount of dark matter present in the
universe. In fact um the height of the
second peak and the third peak
correspond to a universe where there is
26%
of this is dark matter. So uh it's very
good fit but only if we assume the dark
matter is present. Now that's a little
bit technical but the evidence that I
like the best really is this. This is
the bullet cluster.
It's a pair of galaxy clusters. If you
look at this, there's some bright stars
with defraction spikes again and lots
and lots of galaxies. And where the sort
of bluish background is, that is
highlighting
where there is a cluster of galaxies
just left of center and a smaller
cluster off to the right. So, a pair of
galaxies collided with each other. In
fact, they really flew through each
other. Now most of the galaxies have
flown through and come out the other
side unscathed.
But what hasn't become uh able to do
that is the envelope of hot gas that was
surrounding each of the clusters. uh
clusters of galaxies are often permeated
by intergalactic gas and it's usually
very very hot caused by ionization from
all the radiation of all the stars in
all the galaxies in the cluster. You get
this fairly diffuse but very high
temperature cloud of intergalactic gas.
Now in a ga galaxy cluster there are a
lot of gaps and not very many galaxies
and so the galaxies can fall through
each other. The clusters can fall
through each other and the chances are
that the galaxies themselves will all
miss each other which is what's happened
here. But the extended clouds of gas
can't do that. And so what we see is
that the pink color is where the gas is
and the uh gas is no longer where the
main clusters are highlighted in blue.
Let's look at that in a little bit
larger and more detail. So what we have
is the two galaxy clusters after they
have passed through each other.
And then in red we have
the gas
glowing in X-rays
with the one on the right showing a very
clear shock front bell curve to it.
And then the blue area is actually where
all the mass is.
And the mass we can determine the
presence of it by the not by the
galaxies but by the lensing effect their
mass is having on the background stars
and the galaxies further away in the
universe. So the blue areas are actually
the calculated amount of lensing that
has occurred in those regions
and the mass seems to be where the
galaxies are
and the gas has been
delayed and the two clouds of gas have
ended up separated as the galaxy
clusters move through each other.
And what this is telling us is that the
majority of the mass
is where the galaxies are. But it's not
the galaxies. There just isn't enough
mass in the galaxies. It is the dark
matter. And so the two clouds of dark
matter that
were surrounding the individual
clusters, those two have just fallen
through each other unscathed.
And this suggests that this what
whatever it is, this unseen mass is not
sticky. It doesn't interact with itself
very much and was able to fall right
through. Whereas the gas is viscous and
sticky and got separated because it was
delayed by the uh uh interaction with
the two gas clouds. And so this is
pointing towards this strange material
not only being dark but not being
subject to uh being able to sort of
suffer friction either.
And we think that this might be a
strange as yet undiscovered particle
called a WIMP. A weakly interacting
massive particle. And
the name strictly speaking means that it
does not interact with the
electromagnetic fields at all. So, the
dark matter was able to pass straight
through the clouds of gas um in the
bullet cluster without being slowed down
and stay where the force of gravity and
the laws of motion were telling it to
be, but without that frictional delay.
So the idea is that whatever this stuff
is, it only interacts with gravity and
possibly with the weak nuclear force but
not with electromagnetism.
Now the weak nuclear force is one of the
fundamental forces of nature. We have
the strong nuclear force which is the
most powerful and that's what holds the
nucleus of atoms together.
We have the electromagnetic force which
holds charged particles together and
gives us things like light and photons
and that is less strong by a factor of 1
over 137.
And then we have the weak force which is
a million times less strong but is
responsible for things like
radioactivity
um and the decay of one nuclear particle
into another.
And weakest of all is gravity which is
uh 6 * 10 ^ 39 times less strong
absolutely uh tiny but because it always
adds up that tends to uh dominate on on
the large scale whereas the other
particles uh either have sorry the other
forces have very short ranges or um have
both positive and negative which cancel
out.
So, we think that this dark matter only
interacts by the bottom two rows here.
It can't interact by the top two rows
because it would stick to itself and it
would stick to other matter and the
bullet cluster thing just couldn't have
worked. So, it can only be those bottom
two rows. There's actually no evidence
that it genuinely interacts with the
weak force, but there are theories that
suggest that that might be possible.
So, if we
go back to the big bang,
the models that we have are that the
cosmic microwave background must have
been affected by the mass of the dark
matter, and our models just can't make
sense of it without it. And so we think
that huge amounts of dark matter were
made and a relatively small amount of
leftovers in the form of ordinary
hydrogen and helium. Uh the stuff that
we think we understand so much better.
And then of course as the universe
expanded it cooled and gravity was able
to begin pulling material into clumps.
And so in that first early universe
around about the first 200 million years
or so, so the cosmic microwave
background dates from just a third of a
million years after the big bang. And
then we had an era of about 200 million
years dominated by these clouds of
material. clouds mostly made of dark
matter measured in terms of mass uh but
able to pull in hydrogen and helium to
form huge puffy balls of material.
And we would call these things dark
stars. They would have a diffuse outer
layer of hydrogen and helium. Hot, but
not hot enough. We're talking 10,000
Kelvin, something like that. not enough
to uh create the density and pressure
and temperature to trigger nuclear
fusion. It's the cores containing large
amounts of dark matter packed densely
together inside these huge structures
that are where the heat and energy to
power them is coming from. It's the
WIMPs, the trapped, the dark matter
particles, whatever they are trapped
within the cores that are colliding with
each other and annihilating each other
and releasing huge amounts of energy
that is then heating the dark star and
causing it to inflate to the size that
it is maybe um a thousand astronomical
units across. And that this is then
surrounded by this hot but noneyl
liberating hydrogen and helium. So no
nuclear fusion going on. All the energy
is from the dark matter. And the idea is
that these wimps, these dark matter
particles are their own antiparticles.
And so they are able to collide and
annihilate each other in the same way
that matter and antimatter particles of
relatively ordinary matter are observed
to do that and create showers of energy
and gamma rays and all sorts of other
particles. So we think that these events
should be releasing huge amounts of
energy in these dense clumps of dark
matter.
And this annihilation is very very
efficient. It will liberate energy
according to about 100% of the mass of
the dark matter that self annihilates.
Nuclear fusion by comparison only
liberates 1% of the mass as energy when
two hydrogens fuse together. So, this is
a much more energetic process and could
power these 1,000 AU diameter, 1 million
solar mass puff balls of material,
giving them uh this inflated temperature
of 10,000 Kelvin powered by the dark
matter annihilation in the core. And we
think that these dark stars eventually
then go on to become the seed points of
proto galaxies, the first galaxies. And
this is one of the reasons that we're
using things like the James Webb Space
Telescope to try and grope backwards to
the earliest very beginnings of the
formation of stars and uh galaxies in
the universe to see if this idea of dark
stars is actually true.
Now I said that the energy is from the
annihilation of the dark matter and
therefore the dark matter is going to
dissipate gradually. It will eventually
run out of dark matter fuel in the core.
When that happens the energy source goes
away.
So the outward pressure um from the
energy release will stop and the large
cloud of hot hydrogen and helium can
then cool and as it does so collapse and
we think that that is then going to form
the very first generations of stars
so-called population three stars made
entirely of pristine hydrogen and helium
and almost nothing else. And again,
these are objects that we are actively
chasing with things like the James Web
Space Telescope.
But in addition to looking in the very
early universe, we can try to see if
there is any signature of this dark
matter annihilation going on in the more
nearby recent parts of the universe that
we can see. And one place to look is in
the core of the Milky Way, right in the
center of our galaxy.
And when we do that, we see a lot of
ionized gas in the central region that
is being heated by energy pouring out
from the center.
And there are lots of sources of that
energy. But trying to estimate where it
all comes from,
there is some room for the idea that
there is dark matter in the core of the
galaxy that is undergoing this
annihilation process. And one particular
piece of evidence is that we see gamma
rays from the very central region with a
characteristic signature energy of 511
kilo electron volts. An electron volt is
the
uh the amount you need to uh promote an
electron across a potential of one volt.
is the amount of energy difference um
and a kilo electron volts a thousand of
those and 511 keV
is characteristic of matter antimatter
annihilation electron positron
annihilation and that's what we're
seeing but the question is why is it the
case that there is a whole lot of
electrons annihilating with a whole lot
of antimatter posetrons in the middle of
the galaxy. Where are they all coming
from? Um, now some of them may be from
the effects of uh the black hole in the
center or by uh nearby pulsars, things
like that. But the best hypothesis is
that the total amount that we're seeing
points to this dark matter annihilation
going on in the core of the galaxy. Now,
I wouldn't say this is a settled
question, but it's an intriguing
possibility.
Another possible place to look is the
core of the sun. Obviously, the core of
the sun is a lot of mass gathered
together into a denseish ball and it's
fairly nearby. So, we should be able to
detect any strange radiation coming our
way. If there were dark matter being
trapped by the gravity of the sun and
triggering even a modest amount of dark
matter annihilation, we might be able to
detect the signature of it. Um, now it's
difficult because it's overlaid by huge
layers of uh the solar material and so
radiation has a hard time escaping.
takes a million years for your average
photon of energy to get from the core to
the outside of the sun. Uh but we're
very much able to study this stuff and
so far we haven't found anything.
Talking of dense cores then the other
intriguing suggestion is the earth's
core. As the Earth orbits the galaxy
every 250 million years, the path
wanders up and down, wobbles backwards
and forwards as it goes around and
crosses the galactic plane around about
every 32 million years. Some people say
27, some say 32. Um, and I think that's
affected by which bit of the galaxy
you're looking at and where the spiral
arms are.
Now, if the
dark matter in the plane of the galaxy,
which is where it's likely to be very
rich, were to become concentrated by the
passage through the core of the Earth,
which is pretty dense, then just like
the sun that could trap some as well. We
would get the dark matter annihilation
going off in the core of the Earth. And
if you had that occur, it might trigger
the release of a lot of energy in the
core, heating it up, and that energy
would burst its way to the surface after
a while, triggering super volcanoes. And
so it's been suggested that the
potential periodic nature of mass
extinctions on Earth, which seems to
have a period of round about this sort
of 30 million year mark or so, could be
because of crossing of the galactic
plane and that this triggered a burst of
volcanic activity because the dark
matter permeates into the core,
annihilates ates and releases a burst of
energy. Well, it's possible, but well,
we don't know. There's a whole lot of
questions around all of this. So, what
observations have we got? Well, this is
the Jade's survey. This is using the
James Webb Space Telescope's near
infrared camera.
And in April 2023,
it made a discovery
of a whole group of objects in the very
distant universe with red shifts greater
than a factor of 10. Um, and one of them
is up at the top there, Jade's GSZ14-0.
So in fact, that zed is the red shift
and 14 is the value. So this had a red
shift of 14. And this is located as the
map shows
in part of the Hubble ultra deep field
in the constellation of Fornax and uh
they've been able to actually image this
object shown in the inset picture up at
the top there.
So let's have a look at some of the
objects that were found. Well, the first
and perhaps the nearest one is uh I'm
just going to call it Z 10. It has a red
shift of 10.38, which means that we are
looking back to just 500 million years
after the Big Bang. And it's that faint
orange blob in the center there. Tiny
little object.
We've been able to take the spectrum of
it using a whole lot of different
filters and work out the red shift from
the spectral data and be able to compute
just how far away this object is. So
this is Z 10, a red shift of just over
10.
This is Z 12. Red shift 12.6. That puts
it further back in time. Just 400
million years since the Big Bang. And
this is interesting because
in the spectrum used to identify the red
shift and all of the those good things
there is detectable evidence of heavier
elements than just hydrogen and helium.
There's dust which is going to be
silicon oxides and carbon but there's
also the spectrum of neon present. Now
neon is only created in the cores of
fairly large stars. Uh you would create
hydrogen to helium in the smallest
stars. Bigger stars can make carbon and
oxygen. Next up you get magnesium and
neon. Um and you need quite a massive
star to do that. And then those stars
will explode and detonate and throw
their material out into the cosmos. And
we are seeing the spectrum of it from
400 million years after the big bang. So
what we're seeing here is a galaxy
containing stars that are not the first
generation of stars. The first
generation must have come earlier and
made this neon. Um and so we're
beginning to see that stars must have
formed earlier than 400 million years.
So that's Z12. Well, we go back even
further. This is Z13.
We're doing a look back 13.4 billion
years into the past. The light travel
time
since the light set off though, the
space through which the light traveled
has expanded after the beam went
through. And so, actually, this object
is 33 billion light years away from us.
now for somebody's definition of now.
And it's very very bright. This is
billions of suns. This little red blob
right in the center here at this
distance to be as bright as it is. This
is a proto galaxy. A very early galaxy.
That's uh
we can go even further back. This is
Jade's Z14.
Um the one I showed you in the first
place. This is only 300 million years
after the Big Bang. So, we're closing
in. We've got Z14-1,
also uh 300 million years and quite a
high resolution plot of it here, showing
that it's got a diameter of about a
thousand light years. So, this is quite
a small early galaxy. And the light is
definitely coming from uh stars in a
very early galaxy. We can tell that from
the spectrum.
The record holder actually is this one,
Mom Z14, a red shift of 14.44,
pushing us back to 280 million years
after the Big Bang. And this is the
current as of May 2025
record holder for the most distant
galaxy known.
So these are the early galaxies and
we're gradually pushing back the
boundary of where galaxies and the first
stars must have formed.
And then there's this one. This is
actually a little bit closer, a little
bit less redshifted. Jade Z13.
A detailed look at the spectrum of this
reveals that it's an object around
10,000 times the diameter of the sun,
which is way smaller than a galaxy would
be with a mass of about 1 million times
the mass of our sun. And it contains no
spectral lines of heavy elements at all,
just hydrogen and helium. So no
stellar cookery that has created by
nucleiosynthesis,
carbon, neon, all of those other
elements has gone on here. This is just
hydrogen and helium. And the mass and
the size and the temperature all fits
our models of a dark star. So maybe this
is the first dark star to be discovered.
And if confirmed, that would be a
fabulous piece of news for the uh
theoreticians to be able to refine their
models and for our understanding of this
weird stuff called dark matter.
And so, as we're talking about dark
stars, I've got to put this in. Who
remembers the film Dark Star with the
hippie space crew and their pet alien?
Absolutely fantastic film. I just
couldn't resist popping that one in
there for you. Um, uh, I still laugh
about it when I think about it today. It
was absolutely wonderful. Anyway, thanks
very much for listening and I hope
you've enjoyed that trip once around
what we know about dark matter and dark
stars.